---
title: "Optimization of open-loop shallow geothermal systems using the adjoint approach "
collection: talks
type: "Conference Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2021-07-22-SIAM
venue: "SIAM Conference on Optimization"
date: 2021-07-22 
location: "online"
---

Groundwater temperature directly affects the efficiency of groundwater heat pumps, also known as open-loop shallow geothermal systems.
On the other side, groundwater heat pumps cause thermal anomalies in the groundwater, which can reach neighboring systems and deteriorate their operation.
Therefore, it is important to optimally position these systems to avoid negative interactions and maximize overall profitability.
Flow and heat transport in porous media are described with a system of nonlinear coupled PDEs.
In addition, source terms, representing extraction and injection wells, are modeled by non-smooth delta functions.
The underlying problem is a PDE-constrained optimization problem including control (spatial coordinates) and state (groundwater temperature) constraints.
In this talk, we introduce an adjoint-based approach to solve this non-smooth PDE-constrained optimization problem.
Dirac delta functions are approximated with smooth bump functions, which decouples source points from the mesh and enables computation of gradients.
Nonlinear state constraints are incorporated using Moreau-Yosida type regularization terms.
Spatial and temporal discretization, including meshing strategies, are analyzed as well.
The approach is applied on real case scenarios with different numbers of heat pumps.
We employ the finite-element tool FEniCS for the forward model and dolfin-adjoint for the optimization.
